## Virtual Lab: Analysis of DNA Barcodes
#### Week of December 2nd, 2016

In this virtual laboratory, we will start to understand how a DNA sequence can enable us to identify an organism 

### Homework
Answer pre- and post-lecture questions and lab questions. Send these to me via email by our next class (3/27), and also bring this homework to class for additional discussion. 


**Time:** Including viewing the lectures, doing the reading and questions, this should require 60-90 minutes of time. 


**Pre-Lecture Questions and Review:**

Come up with your answer (50 words or less ea.) to the following short-answer questions. 

1. What are the basic steps of Sanger DNA cycle sequencing?
2. From your DNA sequencing experiment, do you think a 100% match is good enough to determine what species your sample is?


**Review:**

You may wish to review the sequencing works:

- See how cycle sequencing works: [Cycle sequencing](https://www.dnalc.org/resources/animations/cycseq.html)


### Lecture

In DNA barcoding, we are attempting match a DNA sequence generated by our experiment (DNA extraction, PCR, and sequencing) with a known sequence in a database. To do this we need to understand where the data came from, how to evaluate those data, and how to evaluate a *potential* match. 

Additionally, we can examine our data not by looking at matched sequences, but by relating our sequences to others and visualizing that relationship by generating a [phylogenetic tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phylogenetic_tree)

Lecture Video: [Link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B3T3ADE4AgOYR2dnalFhMjFMaWM/view?usp=sharing)


**Post-Lecture Questions:**
1. Given our [electrophoresis results](https://github.com/JasonJWilliamsNY/science_institute_2016_materials/blob/master/results/pcr_20170306.jpg), approximately how many basepairs should our individual sequences be?
2. What is a [phred score](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phred_quality_score)?
3. What does 'forward and reverse' sequencing mean?
4. On your PHYLIP NJ (neighbor-joining) phylogenetic tree; assuming you have added the common plants reference data, what species is your sample most closely related to?


### Virtual Laboratory Exercise: Examine a DNA Barcode

**Pre-requisite:** You must sign up for a CyVerse account and request access to **DNA Subway**:

1. Visit the user portal at: [https://user.cyverse.org/](https://user.cyverse.org/)
2. Register for a CyVerse account using your YUHSG email account
3. Check your email for an account confirmation link and follow the confirmation instructions. 
4. Log in to [User Management](https://user.cyverse.org/dashboard/) and open the Apps & Services tab.
5. Go to the Available Services section at the bottom.
6. Find "DNA Subway" and click Request Access. 
7. You may need to fill in some information and you can indicate that you are using DNA Subway in School. 

**Note:** If you have trouble with anything in the registration process please email me. If there are difficulties, you will still be able to use DNA Subway as a guest until we resolve the issue. 

#### Analyzing Barcoding DNA with DNA Subway

##### Starting a project and viewing sequence

1. Login to [DNA Subway](http://dnasubway.iplantcollaborative.org/) using your CyVerse account. If you have trouble getting an account, you can click 'Enter as Guest'
2. Once you are logged in click the blue square 'Determine Sequence Relationships'
3. Under 'Select Project Type' choose 'rbcL'
4. Under 'Select Sequence Source' choose 'Import trace files from DNALC'
5. Select the entry for tracking number **10-366173358**, 3/17/2017, Jason Williams. 
6. Select your sequences (you should have a sequence ending in M13F(-21) and another ending in M13R for each sample). Next, click 'Add selected files.' (**Note:** If you see a warning symbol next to any sequence, be sure to record this in your notes)
7. Under 'Name Your Project' enter "DNA Barcoding Lab, March. 2017", then click 'Continue'
8. On the DNA Subway screen you will see various analysis steps, click on 'Sequence Viewer' to view your DNA Sequence. 
9. Clicking on the name of any sequence in the Sequence Viewer will allow you to view that sequence's chromatogram readout. Examine the sequences as described in the lecture video. 
10. Exit the 'Sequence Viewer' window

##### Cleaning Sequence
1. Click on 'Sequence Trimmer' to run the tool, then click again to view the result. 
2. Exit the 'Sequence Trimmer' window

##### Paring sequence reads
1. Click on 'Pair Builder'
2. Click on 'Try auto paring' (This should work since our sequences are properly named). 
3. Note any sequences that were unable to be paired (because of quality issues). 
4. Click 'Save'

##### Find Sequence Matches

1. Click on the 'BLAST' tool. 
2. Next to the name of your sequence click 'BLAST'; use the result to answer lab question 3. 
3. Exit the 'BLAST' window

##### Generate consensus sequences
1. Click on 'Consensus Builder'; once it has completed, click again to open the result.
2. According to the instructions in the lecture video, trim the consensus sequence at both ends until you leave only the sequence which is covered by a forward and reverse read. 
3. For any discordant sequences (highlighted yellow) record the position and examine these nucleotides to see if you agree with the consensus sequence; change consensus sequence if necessary. 

##### BLAST sequences
1. Click on 'BLAST' and then click the 'BLAST' link next to your sequence. Click the 'View results' link when the search is completed. 
2. Note the top 3 hits (including the species name, number of mismatches). Check the check box next to these top three hits; click the 'Add hits to project' button. 
3. For the top hit, click on the species name to see if photos or other information match any assumptions you had about your sample's species. 

##### Add Reference Data
1. Click on 'Reference Data'
2. Select 'Common plants' and then click the 'Add ref data' button. 


##### Select Data
1. Click on the 'Select Data' stop. 
2. Check all of your added blast hits, commons plants, and your sequence data (skipping any results that were of poor quality)
3. Click 'Save Selections'

##### Generate multiple alignment
1. Click on 'MUSCLE'; when this has completed click on 'MUSCLE' again to view the result. 
2. In the 'Alignment Viewer' click the 'TRIM ALIGNMENT' button on the top of the window. 
3. Look over the alignment for any patterns (though you do not need to record anything). 

##### Generate phylogenetic tree
1. Click 'PHYLIP NJ' to generate a phylogenetic tree. Click again to view the result. 
2. Note the closest 'common plant' related to your samples. Also record the number (bootstrap values) that indicate the strength of this relationship. 




**Lab Questions:**

1. Given the [electrophoresis results](https://github.com/JasonJWilliamsNY/science_institute_2016_materials/blob/master/results/pcr_20170306.jpg) do you think the brightness of the band has a relationship with the sequencing result?
2. Why might generating a consensus sequence be better than working with just a single DNA read?
3. Did your BLAST results return any species with no mismatches? How did your BLAST results match (or contradict) your expectations about the identity of your sample's species?

